it's the first lesson of theory of
computation we're going to say hello
with deterministic finite State automata
let's start a lesson the transition
system in this animation is called
Tollgate nowadays instead of cash we are
opening this kind of gates with active
or passive radio waves but in our
example we're going to consider using
cash thus we'll learn how the cash based
tollgates worked let's imagine you
opened your gate with 25 cents in this
lesson we will learn to turn every
problem into a language problem so every
coin will now represent the letters that
make up a word for us for example 510
and 25 cent coins will turn into letters
a b and c now let's think mathematically
about how we can open the gate first you
can throw 5times 5 cents to open the
gate this solution is perceived by the
automaton as a string with five
A's another solution is 5 + 10 + 10 it
is perceived as ABB and so on thus our
problem has been transformed into a
language problem now we must figure out
which words should be accepted but wait
we have a problem you cannot use
traditional programming methods here
because automaton systems have no memory
so you cannot use variables
when the user puts to machine a new coin
the system cannot remember how much coin
has been thrown in total until that
moment therefore the system cannot
calculate how much more coins needs to
be thrown to open the gate finite State
automa use states to remember situations
instead of variables here we have six
circles and each circle represents a
state if we want to solve the Tollgate
problem with finite state automata we
should see the coins thrown to open the
gate as letters on the
keyboard we will design a automaton to
solve Tollgate Problem by transforming
coins to
letters first we need a set of States
each state is used to remember something
for example in the solution of Tollgate
opening with 25 cents problem q0 is the
initial state so we use it to remember
that there is no money at the automaton
yet q1 shows we have 5 Cents Only
likewise Q2 is 10 cents thus you can
comment Q3 and Q4 finally the Q5
represents 25 cents which is our Target
now we have defined the tasks of the
states to use in our
solution second we need an alphabet
since each coin the user throws will
correspond to a letter we must first
Define an alphabet in map which symbol
each coin Cor Corr responds to third we
need to describe transitions among the
defined States in fact it's easier to
plan transitions once you've identified
the tasks of the States since we're
going to write a deterministic program
anyway we have to represent each symbol
in our alphabet as an arrow going out of
each state note that we call the arrows
as edges in graph Theory like the others
there should be three edges that come
out of
q0 5 cents 10 cents and 25 cents we said
that in our problem there are three
exiting edges from each state in
accordance with the alphabet but it is
up to the programmer to determine which
states they will lead to Fourth we have
to Define where the system will start
one of the states defined to solve the
problem must be identified as start
state or in other words initial state
fifth we need to Define where the system
will stop the states which should open
the gate must be described as except
state or in other words final State we
now come to the formal definition of a
finite automaton definition a finite
automaton is a 5le m equals capital Q
capital Sigma Delta lowercase Q capital
F where capital Q is a finite set whose
elements are called States capital Sigma
is a finite set called the alphabet the
elements of Sigma are called symbols
Delta is a function defined as cartisian product
of capital Q and capital Sigma
goes capital Q called the transition
function lowercase Q is an element of Q
it is called the start state capital F
is a subset of capital Q the elements of
capital F are called except States you
can think of the transition function
Delta as being the program of the finite
automaton
it's our first example capital A is
defined with w words so that W is a
binary string containing an odd number
of
ones here because of the question our
alphabet will be binary so capital Sigma
includes zero and one only then we
should find the States since the
question does not deal with the letter
zero we can focus on only letter one
each letter one entered by the user will
change the even status of the number of
ones in the typed string because of the
logic requested in the question it is
sufficient to Define two states Q odd
and Q even due to the nature of the
problem Q even should be defined as the
initial State as the user begins to
enter symbols into the system from
outside there may be a transition
between States but this will depend on
the problem here any zero symbol entered
by the user does not require any state
change but the symol one causes the
states to change every time when we
admit this solution to ourselves the
transition diagram on the screen
appears just as we can use tools such as
Chopsticks other than Forks while eating
we can also design finite state automa
with different tools for now we will
proceed with two tools transition
diagram and table method in simple terms
a transition diagram is a graphical
representation of the table method in
this example when the system starts up
it boots up in the Q even State and for
example if the user enters a zero symbol
at that time the system understands that
it must remain in the Q even State a
second example I equals W so that W is a
binary string containing 101 as a
substring here when we reach a 101 one
sequence we accept it this substring can
be at beginning end or middle of the
string we said that there is no memory
in automa then we must design states
that enable the system to remember these
three consecutive
symbols examine the situations below Q
is the start state it means we have
nothing q1 means the first symbol letter
one came it made an alarm q1 to zero
means the second symbol letter zero came
it increases the alarm level
q11 means the third symbol letter 1 came
the automaton must accept the string now
it's time to plan the initial State the
first question is what State Should the
initial State be could it be one of the
situations that belong to the solution
we have in mind or should we add a new
situation after finding the answer to
this question we will ask the following
question have we planned an outgoing
Edge labeled with each letter in the
alphabet for each states of the solution
we have in mind where should it go if
the symbol zero appears if symbol one
comes up where should it Go and the last
question in what states do we meet the
conditions required by the problem we
will make the states where all
conditions are met the except State and
indicate this with a double lined Circle
a third example I equals W is element of
0 to one star so that W has a one in the
third position from the left this
problem is easier than the previous one
because the first and the second letters
are not important we can think at first
the third letter from the start the
first symbol can be zero or one also the
second symbol can be 0 or one but that
the third one must be one only then we
will say this to the automaton we will
Design if a symbol one comes as the
third letter then go and accept stay and
stay there otherwise go a reject State
and stay there here we need to remember
the sequence number of the letters up to
the third letter thus we use at least
four states to check the third symbol
then we add a last state for rejecting
that's all we need five states a fourth
example a equals W element of zer one
star so that W has a one in the third
position from the right here the last
three letters are important and we need
remember them all therefore we need
eight different states eight states
starting with q 000000 and going up to
q11 since each new symbol from the user
is added to the right of the string the
last three letters of the string we have
will change and therefore the state in
the design may have to change to another
state after determination of the states
designing the transitions will be easier
of course for someone new to the subject
this question may seem difficult at
first glance please try to understand
the transitions by checking them one by
one if you do not understand why the
transitions are defined this way or if
the transition
diagram still seems complicated to you
go back to the previous step you can
review our Solution on how we determine
the total number of
states that's all thanks for
listening